This folder contains all files related to documentation using Doxygen+Breathe+Sphinx.

### Instructions on how to document a new class:
- Create className.rst file in docs/classes directory
- Add the following lines of code to the file:
  ```bash
  className
  =========
  .. doxygenclass:: className
   :members:
  ```
- Add this class to the list of displayed classes in the file 'index.rst' in docs/classes directory, by adding the className to the end of the list.
  ```bash
  className
  ```

 ### Instructions on how to document a new file:
- Create fileName.rst file in docs/files directory
- Add the following lines of code to the file: (for eg. we are adding a .h file, .cpp file is added in the same way)
  ```bash
  fileName
  ========
  .. doxygenfile:: fileName.h
  ```
- Add this file to the list of displayed files in the file 'index.rst' in docs/files directory, by adding the fileName (without extension) to the end of the list.
  ```bash
  fileName
  ```

### Building updated documentation:
- If you have made the above changes (for either class or file) in a separate pull request, the documentation will be autogenerated and checked for any issues, you can view it and merge.
- If you directly commited the changes, go to readthedocs.org and click on 'Build version'.

### Adding comments to the code for effective documentation:
- The commenting format for documenting code using Doxygen can be found here: [Documenting the code: Special comment blocks](https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/docblocks.html)
- If you are using vscode, you can simply add an extension for doxygen "Doxygen Documentation Generator". Once you install it, now wherever you want to add comments just type `/**` and press the Enter key. It will autogenerate a comment block which you can populate according to your needs.
